
# Chapter 1 - Understanding the PVG

What do you want to do with your music? No, I don't mean once it's finished. Dr. T can't help you get a record contract, or put together a performing group. I mean, what do you want to do with your music as you're in the process of creating it?

The simplest way to use your Keyboard Controlled Sequencer is as a real-time MIDI recording and playback tool. Once you've recorded some tracks or sequences, though, you'll probably find yourself using the many editing features of the KCS to make alterations, small or large, in the data. That's the wonderful thing about MIDI sequencing: It turns music into an open-ended, plastic medium.

In a powerful sequencer like the KCS, anything from fixing an isolated mistake to restructuring an entire piece can be handled with a few quick keystrokes. Even without the Programmable Variations Generator, the KCS contains just about all of the standard editing tools found in the current generation of MIDI sequencers, not to mention a handful of tools that aren't found on any other sequencer. And for many types of music, standard editing may be all you'll need. Yet the PVG goes much further.

It is a much more generalized environment for making changes in music data - a tool both for editing music that already exists, and for generating entirely new music. After using it for a while, you may even find yourself envisioning whole new compositional structures that can take advantage of the PVG's unique strengths.

As an editing tool, the PVG lets you make a wide variety of precisely controlled changes in a track or sequence. Some of these actually duplicate the functions found in the standard KCS editing environment or the Master Editor. But there's a reason for the duplications, as you'll see when you start building macros. Other changes, while still precisely controlled in nature, go further. For example, you could transpose a sequence up by a half-step while instructing the PVG to ignore some specific notes and transpose others. If it ignores C, D, F, and G while Oo transposing Eb, Ab, and Bb, the result of the operation would be to modulate a sequence in the key of C minor into the key of C major. Needless to say, the PVG can do edits far more complex than this. If this were all it did, however, there would be no reason to call it a "variations generator".

A key concept behind the program is that it allows you to make changes in a track or sequence while specifying some aspects of the change and letting the computer determine other aspects for you. Generally speaking, the user defines the changes to be made in broad terms, and then the computer fills in the details at random. For example, you might want to make a number of small variations in note velocity in order to make a melody line sound a bit less stiff. Instead of typing in a number of values on the KCS edit screen, which could take some time, you can instruct the PVG to alter the velocities for you.

This is rather like a painter blotting an area of a watercolor with a terrycloth towel to add texture. The nature of the desired effect is known in advance, and the handling of the towel may require some skill; yet the precise pattern that will emerge within any given square centimeter is absolutely not under the control of the painter. (And if the painter botches the job, the watercolor may be ruined. With the PVG, you can simply click on Undo and try again!)

Even this example only hints at the power of the PVG. At the deepest level, it is a resource for machine- generated composition. This rather specialized field has existed only since the early 1950s, when the primitive computers of the day were first used to choose pitches and durations for instrumentalists to perform. At about the same time, John Cage and other composers began experimenting with indeterminacy in composition using random number tables, star charts, and other types of data that had not previously been considered musical resources. The interest in indeterminacy was primarily a revolt against the rigldly authoritarian system of total serialism in composition, which was very much in vogue in college and university music departments at the time. Indeterminacy also struck a blow against expressionism, the belief that music ought to express or evoke human emotions. At its best, indeterminacy in composition embodies an Oriental philosophy of total acceptance of the present moment. Another term for indeterminate music is 'aleatoric' music, from the Latin word 'alea', which means dice. (Okay, the Latin scholars who raised their hands get a gold star. Actually, 'alea' means die. The plural is 'aleae') And above all, the Programmable Variations Generator is a way of playing dice with your music. You may consider the results expressive, or not expressive, and you may want to mix chance with choice in various ways, but the dice-throwing operation is the same in any case. You may not always like the results of the PVG's operations, or find them musically useful.

Like any musical tool, this software requires some effort to learn, and still more effort to use effectively. Musical tools also require an esthetic context in which they can have meaning. It's instructive to remember, for example, that when Mozart sat down at the piano, all of the chords that Dave Brubeck uses were right there under his fingers. He couldn't find them, however. If he did accidentally stumble onto one, it sounded like wrong notes. The reason is that the isolated jazz chord had no context. The harmonic language that would have made it meaningful was not yet born. In the same way, the results of PVG operations may sometimes sound like glbberish, not because they are intrinsically bad or useless but simply because the software tool is capable of far more than we can understand, glven our own present-day esthetic perspectives.

Unlike real-time interactive "improvising" software, the PVG is not optimized to produce music that is immediately pleasing to the average listener. It requires a little more effort to use well, because it is capable of far more musical variety. What the PVG does is allow a composer to try out many compositional processes rather quickly, in order to find the ones that sound best in a particular context, or that suggest some new context that can be made meaningful. Instead of constructing elaborate sequences with time-consuming single-step data entry, the composer can use high-level processes to generate large amounts of material quickly, seize the portions of the material that sound good, and move on.