# Chapter 5 - Restrictions

[[toc]]

Protection is a way of restricting the source material that the PVG may use in its operations. Restrictions, on the other hand, are a way of controlling the results of the operations.

The RESTRICTIONS sub-screen is found at the lower left when the Changes screen is selected. Restrictions apply only to changes made from the Changes screen. (Protection also applies to Changes, though the PROTECTION sub-screen doesn't appear on this screen.)

Note that restrictions do not apply to the results of certain operations. For example, if you restrict the program to the notes of the C major scale and then enter a positive weight under Interval in the Changes section, black-key notes may very well appear in the output sequence. This is because Interval transposes everything in the source sequence that falls beyond the interval that is varied. The program does not check to make sure that all subsequent notes will fall on white keys as a result of the operation.

## Scale Positions

When you highlight a scale position (by clicking on it) in the row below the word RESTRICTIONS, the program will not generate the notes you have highlighted. (To clear this row, simply click on the X at the right end.)

If you have switched off Miow New Scale Positions in the Defaults box then each time you enter the PVG, it will analyze the current sequence and preset this row accordingly. That is, if your sequence contains no F#s, then F# will be highlighted to prevent any F#s from being generated. This is an easy way of staying in the same key while creating a variation. (To change the Miow New Scale Positions switch, click on Defaults in the menu.)

## Pitch Limits

This parameter allows you to set boundaries outside of which the PVG will not create notes. This is quite useful when lots of scale pitch shifts are being generated, as the program can produce a surprising number of notes in the very top and bottom octaves of the MIDI note range, where most synthesizers don't sound their best.

Enter the values for Pitch Limits using note-name letters and octave numbers like those seen on the KCS edit screen. The specific notes entered are the upper and lower boundaries of the pitches that will be allowed; notes beyond. those entered will not be allowed. If you enter only one value under Pitch Limits, the other value will be set to the extreme end of the range.

As with the individual scale position restrictions, Pitch Limits will not prevent notes outside the selected range from being generated if certain options such as interval variation are used. The new interval itself will always be inside the pitch limits, but the remainder of the sequence may easily wander too high or too low. (If this causes a musical problem, simply transpose the offending range of notes up or down an octave.)

## Velocity Limits

Use this item when varying velocity to prevent velocity values from getting too low or too high. As with Pitch Limits, entering only one value will cause the other to default, when the Change operation takes place, to the extreme end of the allowed data range.

## Minimum Time

This parameter is used in conjunction with Time and Shift (compensated time) changes to prevent the PVG from jamming notes too dose together. For example, if you are starting with a single monophonic line of even eighth-notes (time values of 12) and varying the Time and Shift parameters by 6, setting Mililmuin Time to 6 will prevent the program from generating any two-note unisons.

## Autocorrect

The purpose of Autocorrect is just what you'd expect: It causes the new time values generated by the program to take on metrically even values.

Another way of getting a similar result would be to set only metrically even values in the Time and Shift parameters.

The difference between these two approaches becomes apparent when you are varying a sequence that isn't auto-corrected to begin with. In this situation, metrically even values in the Time and Shift parameters will continue to generate odd time values, depending on what the original times of the notes may be.

That is, shifting a time value of 17 (odd) by 6 (a sixteenth note) will generate an odd value of 11 or 23. When an Autocorrect value is set under RESTRICTIONS, the program will generate only new time values that are multiples of the Autocorrect value (changing 17 to 12 or 18).

 > Figure 3 (Original PVG manual page 33) Preset to perform Various random pitch changes. No sharps or pitches higher than B6 will be produced.

## Duration Adjust & Duration Limit

When the Duration Adjust switch is highlighted, the program will prevent notes from overlapping by changing the duration of the note preceding any note that is shifted backward in time, in such a way that the duration of the preceding note will never be greater than the time value that separates them. 

When a note is shifted forward in time, creating a greater gap between the two, the duration is not changed. Note also that the duration of the shifted note itself is never changed; when shifted forward, it may now be overlapping a subsequent note.

Duration Limit has nothing to do with Time or Shift changes. It is a switch that prevents a duration change if that change would cause the note to overlap the next note. (The lower limit of duration changes is always 1; the program will not create notes of 0 duration.)
