# Chapter 16 Get, Store, Load & Save

These menu items are used to handle the PVG presets you create. The program holds 80 different presets in memory at a time -- 20 each of the Vary Notes, Ornaments, Add Controllers, and Vary Controllers types. Each preset contains a data list of all the parameters you have entered. A Vary Notes preset contains the values and settings on the Changes, Swap/Copy, Set Values, Global 1, Global 2, and Split/Pattern screens, the GENERAL OPTIONS, RESTRICTIONS, and PROTECTION sub-screens, as well as the settings in the Defaults window. Presets of the other three types contain only the values and settings shown on thefr single screens, including the RESTRICTIONS and PROTECTION sub-screens. The PVG also holds 20 macros, which contain all the settings on the Macros screen. when you click on Get or Store from a single preset screen, the program understands that you want to get or store a preset of that type. when you do so from the Macros screen, the program understands that you want to get or store a macro. After creating or editing a preset or macro, be sure to name it (by typing something over the word Default in the lower right corner) before clicking on Store. This will make it much easier to find in the preset list. When you click on Get or Store, a pop-up window will show you a list of the presets of that type or macros that are currently in memory. To store a preset or macro after making edits in it, point the cursor at the location where you would like to store it and single- click with the left mouse button. (Note that the presets and macros are always in memory, like synthesizer patches. There is no need to store one after getting it and using it, the way you would put a cheese grater back into a kitchen drawer after using it. You should only store it if you wish to save the edits you have made.) The Get operation loads a preset or macro from memory into the currently active buffer. This action erases whatever is in the buffer, so don't use Get unless you're willing to lose the contents of the buffer! If you change your mind about the Get or Store operation, simply click on CANCEL at the bottom of the window, and no memory shuffling will be done. The Save operation allows you to save the entire contents of the PVG's memory (all 80 presets and 20 macros) to disk in a file with a .VRY extension. The Load operation lets you load such a file from disk. These operations use a standard file select when booted, the KCS will load a file named DEFAULT.VRY if it finds one on the disk. The PYG is shipped with a variety of presets in this file that you might find useful. If you want to, you can rename this file as something else and create your own DEFAULT.VRY file.