# Dr. T's Programmable Variations Generator and Master Editor

 > by Emile Tobenfeld Manual by Jim Aikin 
 > OCR & formattting by mclaren 
 > Additional material by Emile Tobenfeld and Jim Johnson
 > Copyright 1988 All Rights Reserved
 
## Publisher's Note About This Manual

Thank you for purchasing the Level II version of the Keyboard Controlled Sequencer. This manual describes the features contained in Level II that are not present in Version 1.6 of the KCS. If your disk contains a file named README, be sure to read it before using the program, as it may contain information about changes made since the completion of this manual.

The Level II KCS contains two extremely powerful editing modules that are not present in V1.6: the Programmable Variations Generator (PVG) and the Master Editor. These modules are closely related, as most of the features of the PVG can be used for editing as well as the generation of variations. Level II also supports the recording, playback, and editing of polyphonic key pressure events.

The first 17 chapters of this manual describe the operation of the PVG, while Chapter 18 describes the Master Editor and Chapter 19 describes the handling of polyphonic key pressure events. A Note on the PVG While the Programmable Variations Generator has been subjected to extensive testing by many musicians during the course of it's development, there is no way we could possibly test all the possible combinations of variation operations, parameter settings, and input sequences. Due to the nature of the program, it is not possible to predict the results you will obtain with any degree of certainty, except in the case of strictly deterministic (non-random) editing. For this reason, please remember that you may not always be able to get exactly what you're looking for from the program.

The PVG is an enormously capable musical instrument, and is arguably the most powerful composition system ever seen on this planet. We at Dr. T's have only begun to scratch the surface of the system's capabilities. While we are happy to provide customer support for situations involving catastrophic bugs and other major problems, we are not, at this time, able to provide in-depth applications support for the PVG. Even though we have not experienced any severe problems with the PVG, the experimental nature of the program makes it wise to back up your sequence data more frequently than you might normally.

## Preface

For Tom Trobaugh (1955-1987) whose creative energies inspired all those who knew him. History In January of 1986, we published our Commodore 64 Algorithmic Composer package, three programs for the algorithmic generatiQn of music. An immediate reaction of some users, including myself, was that it would be nice to he able to algorithmically modiiy music that we had recorded ourselves. I started thinking about the possibilities for a program called Mgorithmic Variations, and attempted to cajole Jim Johnson, one of the authors of the Algorithmic Composer, to write it. He decided, correctly in my opinion, that it would be very difficult to write such a program on the Commodore and make it run smoothly enough to be worth using, and that the market for such a program probably would not justiiy the effort.

While working on the KCS for the C128 and ST, I did some thinking about the things that one would want in such a program. In January and February of 1987, I took a 'vacation' from working on the ST KCS, and implemented many of the features found in the Changes and Swap/Copy screens of the PVG. I found the program fascinating to use, and made some interesting music. I found that I could be almost hypnotized by a series of evolving variations that a simple preset could generate from a simple line of maybe a dozen notes, and even more fascinated if I played two or three sets of such variations slightly out of phase with each other.

As I made additions to the PVG, the nature of the program changed somewhat. It was originally intended as a tool to allow these changes to evolve over time. Although the user had very precise control over the kinds of changes to be made, the process was essentially random in nature. As I added features like global changes and macros, it became possible to use the program to do quite complex things that were completely determined. These can either create variations on a piece or just be editing operations. The PVG in fact provides a very powerful editing environment with a number of useful orchestration tools as well.

The Master Editor contains additional edit operations that did not fit into the PVG scheme. Actually, many of the features can be used either for the generation of variations or for editing, which makes them as much part of the Master Editor as part of the PVG. A consistent part of my approach to designing and coding the PVG has been the desire to make things as general as possible. If I let you do something to the pitch of a note, I am likely to let you do the same thing to its velocity, duration, timing, MIDI channel, perhaps all at once. Likewise, in addition to allowing you to change, set, copy or swap parameter values, I also allow you to do things like rotate and time-reverse. This leads to a program with many screens, and more possibilities than one can absorb in a few hours or even days. Fortunately, the program is organized so that you can usually ignore those features that you do not want to use. Using the PVG I suggest that you bite off this program in small chunks, trying a few features here and there and seeing where they take you musically, then trying some more, etc. If you need to do something specific to a piece, search through the screens and the manual to see if there is a feature that will do the job. As you use the program, you should get a better picture of the kinds of things it can do, and how it various parts fit together.

The PVG and Master Editor can be used in a number of different ways. You can use them strictly as editing tools to put together a preconceived piece of music as rapidly and accurately as possible. You can use them as a grab-bag of tools, available to he applied to a musical phrase any time you are so moved by whim or inspiration. They can also be explored as a source of music in themselves. You can, for example, set up a complex macro (random or not) using the consecutive lines feature, and try applying it to different input phrases and compare the different output variations that are produced.

As of this writing (December 1987) I have been reading James Gleick's excellent book "Chaos: Making a New Science." This got me thinking about using the Level II KCS to generate musical analogs to some of the processes described in the book, which contains some beautiful computer graphics images generated from things like Mandelbrot diagrams. You may ask "What is so musically appeallng about chaos?" and this is certainly a reasonable question. As it happens, the physical processes that involve chaos include those responsible for determining the shapes of things like clouds, waterfalls, tree branches, and leaves; all of which are commonly thought to be beautiful and appropriate subjects for visual artists in all media. I realized that there were many ways to accomplish this using macros in the PVG, but I also added the recursive feature in the Pitch Map section of the Master Editor. This allows you to take a sequence, apply the pitch map to it, append the result to the original, apply the same pitch map to the result, append again ... The results I obtained in a couple hours of experimentation were quite promising.

Another interesting trick is to take a sequence of only a single note (perhaps including a controller value or two), and create a macro with a series of lines that can modify it. Set the Lines value to 1, and make a large number of variations. The results are far more interesting than you would expect from the description, especially if two or three parts generated with the same macro are played out of phase. Alternatively, you can use protection to cause each line to operate only on certain notes, set the Lines value to 0, and create a non-randomly evolving line from the single note. Of course, a photographer does not just point his camera at a random tree, cloud or waterfall and snap the shutter. To obtain a good picture, he must consider lighting, angle, framing and other compositional aspects. Likewise, a composer using a tool like the PVG to generate musical lines must consider compositional aspects such has overall structure, sound choices, and the textures obtained by combining different parts to create a successful composition. Even though many of the musical lines in a piece were generated by a computer program, the composition is as much a creation of the composer as a good photograph is the creation of the photographer.

One aspect of the graphics obtained from chaos theory is a property called unity (or symmetry) over scale. Small pieces of the drawing when blown up look much like the entire drawing. There are a number of ways to simulate this using the KCS, I leave them to your imagination.

## Acknowledgement

I would like to acknowledge the support and suggestions of more friends and users than I can comfortably list here.

The Chords feature of the Master Editor was suggested by Jeff Baker, the Auto- Correct and Follow features are extensions of ideas proposed by Jeff Baker and lasos. The Match features are extensions of ideas first developed by Jim Johnson in his Series program for the C64. The Pitch Map feature is an extension of ideas first suggested by Richard Munson. The Macro feature was suggested by Tom Trobaugh and Laurie Spiegel, and Pattern Matching was suggested by Tom Trobaugh. I would also like to thank Al Hospers, Bruce Carroll, Bob Rees and George Lewis for encouragement and helpful discussions.

Emile Tobenfeld (Dr. T)